so my was trying to explain something to
me about grandma when they grew up but I
couldn't pay attention to her because I
was five years old and I was petrified I
had just seen the green lady now about a
week earlier I watched that movie
Godzilla the one about that huge lizard
like be storming a major city and the
thought of a green monster coming from
he was stuck in my mind and yet there I
was at the tip lower Manhattan with my
mom just staring at her her horns her
muscles all of it just frightened me and
I didn't know whether she was a monster
or a hero so I decided to consult the
Google of the day MA my mother explained
that the green lady is actually the
Statue of Liberty and that she was
waving immigrants in now the part of her
explanation that really messed with my
young head was the fact that quoting the
MA long before us the green lady was
actually brown brown like me and that
she changed colors over the years now
much like America another part that
really is intriguing about this is that
when she changed colors she made me
think about myself now it all made sense
to me because as a first-generation
American I was surrounded by immigrants
in fact within my immediate social
circle of the people who support me who
enriched my life at least two are
foreign-born my life as a US citizen is
in many ways shaped by newcomers and
chances are so is yours
there are more than 40 million
immigrants in the USA according to
census data a quarter of the nation's
children have at least one foreign-born
parent I know all these statistics
because I study global migration
patterns I'm a journalist and for the
last few years I've been documenting the
lives of US citizens who've lost people
to deportation and the numbers are
enormous
from 2008 to 2016 more than three
million people were ordered removed
that's the technical term for being
deported there is an economic a
political a psychological and an
emotional cost to those deportations
some moments when these circles are
broken I once asked a US soldier why did
you volunteer to fight this war and she
told me because I'm proud to defend my
country but I pressed a no really when
you're on base and you hear bombs
exploding in the distance and you see
soldiers coming back who are gravely
injured in that moment when you know you
could be next what does my country mean
she looked at me my country is my wife
my family my friends my soldiers what
she was telling me is that my country is
the collection of these strong
relationships these social circles when
the social circles are weakened a
country itself is weaker we're missing a
crucial aspect in the debate about
immigration policy rather than focusing
on individuals we should focus on the
circles around them because these are
the people who are left behind the
voters the taxpayers the ones who are
suffering that loss and it's not just
the children of the deported who were
impacted you have brothers and sisters
who are separated by borders you have
classmates teachers law enforcement
officers technologists scientists
doctors who were all scrambling to make
sense of new realities when their social
circles are broken these are the real
lives behind all these statistics that
dominate discussions about immigration
policy but we don't indict rying to
change that here's just one of the real
life stories that I've collected and it
still haunts me I met Ramon and his son
in 2016
the same year both of them were being
ordered out of the country Ramon was
being deported to Latin America while
his son who was a sergeant US military
was being deployed deported
deployed if you just look at Ramon's
case it wouldn't be clear how deeply
connected to the country he is but
consider a son a US citizen defending a
country that's banished his father the
social circles what's key here here's
another example that illustrates those
critical bonds a group of citizens in
Philadelphia were concerned about their
jobs because the legal owner of the
restaurant where they worked was an
undocumented immigrant and immigration
officials had picked him up they rallied
behind him an immigration lawyer argued
he was too important to local community
to be deported at the hearing they even
submitted restaurant reviews restaurant
reviews in the end a judge exercised
what's called judicial discretion and
allowed him to stay in the country but
only because they considered the social
circle there are 23 million non-citizens
in the USA according to verifiable
federal data and that doesn't include
the undocumented because numbers of that
population are at best complex estimates
let's just work with what we have that's
23 million social circles about a
hundred million individuals whose lives
could be impacted by deportation and the
stress of it all is trickling down to
the population a 2017 pulled by UCLA of
LA County residents found that 30
percent of citizens in LA County are
stressed about deportation not because
they themselves could be removed but
rather because members of their social
circle were at risk I am NOT suggesting
that no one should ever be deported
don't confuse me with that but what I am
saying is that we need to look at the
bigger picture if you are within the
sound of my voice I want you to close
your eyes for a moment and examine your
own social circle who your foreign-born
what would it feel like if the circle
were broken share your story on building
a global archive of first-person
accounts and linking them with mapping
technology so that we can see a
exactly where these circles break
because this is not just an American
issue there are a quarter billion
migrants around the world people living
loving and learning in countries where
they were not born and in my career in
my life I've been one of them in China
in Africa in Europe and each time I
become one of these foreigners one of
these strange-looking guys in a new land
I can't help but think back to that day
when I was in lower Manhattan with my
mom all those decades ago when I was
scared and I had just spotted that green
lady and I guess the question that I
keep on thinking about when I see her
and all the younger replicas of her that
are so obviously brown and even the
paintings that showcase her in the
beginning as not quite green when I look
at all of that the question that my
research seeks to answer becomes to me
the same one that confounded me all
those years ago is she a monster or a
hero
thank you
[Applause]